Hello.
Welcome to ViewBase NSTableView from
Basic to Advanced online.
My name is Corbin Dunn.
I'm a Cocoa software engineer.
So what are we going to talk about today?
Well, new on Lion,
NSTableView now supports NSView.
You don't have to use NSCell.
So it's much easier,
you don't have to do any subclassing
NSCell to do hit testing,
drawing, whatever.
Now, why is this great?
Well, you can do easy design time layout
inside of Interface Builder and
just do it all by adding one view,
another view, another subview.
You can animate stuff because we
can move views around really easily.
You can customize drawing by just
subclassing NSView and adding
other things that you need.
You can do other animations
inside of the cell,
which were difficult to do before.
So what are we going to talk about?
We're going to talk about layout,
which is general NSTableView and
how the new NSViews fit into it.
Talk about construction,
which is how to go ahead and actually
create a View-based TableView.
I'm going to talk about bindings,
so how to use bindings
with this new technology.
I'm going to discuss some customizing,
so how to do subclassing and add
some cool new features to it.
I'm going to talk about drag
and drop and doing some new
multi-image dragging with the tables.
And then finally,
we'll talk a little bit about animating.
Now, when I say the word Cell,
I'm just going to mean
a particular row column.
If I mean NSCell,
I'll go ahead and say NSCell.
So I just want to set that
out there so you understand.
So let's just jump right
into it and do a demo.
And this is called the
TableView Playground Demo.
You can go ahead and download
it on developer.apple.com
and play around with it.
And I'm going to show a few of the
features of the View-based TableView.
So right here, this window is a
Basic View-based TableView.
It just creates the other windows for
the application to show pieces of the UI.
And it's completed -- or
created complete with bindings.
There's actually no code
really to do any of this.
So I'm going to go ahead
and hide that window.
So here's a basic View-based TableView.
It looks like any other
NSTableView that you have.
It has an image and cell.
It does typical selection.
And it's really easy to create.
The basics here is that it
looks just like any other table.
So let's take a look at a
more advanced TableView.
This is the complex
TableView example inside the demo.
And what you see here
is as things scroll in,
views animate in,
which was difficult to do before.
Up at the top,
the headers can flow over content,
something really easy to do now.
We can do animations.
So I can go ahead and
select a row and delete it.
We can do insertions.
We can do moves.
So I can move from one row to another.
A real easy API to do this.
We can do things like
animating the row height.
And while the row height is animating,
we can animate the views inside of it.
It's really easy to do.
NSOutlineView is a
subclass of NSTableView.
It has all these features too.
It does a cool animation throughout
the OS when things open and collapse.
A neat thing about this table view is
we can do some cool insert animations.
I create drag images and as I let go,
the little gap opens up and the
rows just slide on into place.
I also show how to do reordering
inside of it in an animated fashion.
So those are a few of the things I'm
going to highlight and talk about.
So let's go ahead and talk about layout.
Now NSTableView layout.
So here's a table in
that sample application.
Typical layout:
we have an NSScrollView at the top,
and the scroll view is the thing
that lets you do the scrolling.
The next layer of the subview
hierarchy is an NSClipView,
and this is what actually
clips the content.
Then inside of there,
you have your NSTableView,
which actually might be a lot
bigger than what you see there.
And the ClipView is what
actually does the clipping.
Now all of that's pretty much
the same for what we already had
with the NSCell-based TableView.
So let's take a look at
what's actually new here.
And the next level of a subview
that's new is an NSTableRowView.
So let's take a look at
NS Table Row View and
see what it does for you.
So the row view is responsible
for drawing selection.
And the table has a few selection styles,
and the row view has some
properties so you can access
and see that selection style.
So here's NSTableView Selection
Highlight Style Regular.
And of course we have a
Source List Highlight Style,
so NSTableView Selection
Highlight Style Source List.
The rowView is also responsible
for drawing the background color.
So you could set the
rowView.backgroundColor to be a red
color and that row will draw red.
Or whatever color you want.
Of course the red looks kind of ugly,
but this is just an example.
It can make it green or
whatever else you want.
It's really easy to do.
The row view is also responsible for
drawing the group row background.
So the group row background we
saw in that outline view demo,
there's a whole row with the little
gray to kind of separate a group.
This is done by you implementing the
delegate method TableViewIsGroupRow,
or the equivalent OutlineView version,
and saying yes for which
rows are group rows.
These give you that group row style,
and if that's set,
group row style will be yes,
and it can draw differently.
In addition, there's a new property on
TableView called FloatsGroupRows,
so all those group rows can automatically
float over content optionally.
And if that's set,
the row view has a floating
property which would be set to Yes.
And then you as a subclasser
could look at that property and
draw differently if you want.
The row view also draws the separators
between one row and another.
The reason it does this is it
allows the separator to move around
with the row when it animates.
The separator is specified by the
grid-style mask on the TableView.
There are a couple of options.
There is the NSTableView Solid Horizontal
Gridline Mask.
It's really hard to see
it in this screenshot.
There's also a new one in
Lion that's a dashed option.
Again, it's really hard to see the dash,
but you can look closer in the
demo app and you can see it.
The row view is also responsible
for drawing drag and drop feedback.
So when you drag over that row,
you want the whole row to show
some type of feedback to the user.
And so there is dragging
destination styles that the
TableView has and draws for you.
There's NSTableView dragging
destination feedback style regular,
which is just the regular feedback style.
And there's also a source list
style that has a different look for
source lists or sidebars or whatnot.
The row view computes a few properties,
and one of them is the
interior background style.
So why is this important?
Well, depending on what properties
the table set on the row view,
like if it's selected or whatnot,
the row view will calculate
what its background should be.
So in this case,
the interior background style
is set to NSBackgroundStyleDark.
So that lets you know that, hey,
all my content should probably be light
text because I'm on a dark background.
And then, of course,
there's NSBackgroundStyleLight if
it's actually a light background,
and you should probably have dark
text to stand out against it.
There are a few more NSBackgroundStyle
options that I encourage you to look at,
which might be set.
These are the two basic ones that
are really important to know.
Now, that was the one thing that
the TableRowView computed.
It doesn't compute all
the other properties,
the selection and whatnot.
They are set by the TableView.
You as a developer could
use the new delegate method.
TableView did add RowView for row
to go ahead and override these
properties to be whatever you want.
Let's take a look at NSTableColumn
and how it works with NSTableRowView.
The row view stores a number of
columns and there is a view per column.
If we look at this table here,
the outline view example,
you can see there are three columns.
There's one, two, three.
If we take a look at
one individual row view,
it has all three columns inside of it,
so it stores its number of columns.
If we zoom up and look at
it a little bit closer,
you can see it has one view per column.
It stores that and that view
there could be any NSView.
This first one is just a regular
NSView with regular subviews,
an image and an NSTextField.
You can put whatever you want.
It doesn't have to be a
special subclass of anything.
And so this is just a
regular NSTextField.
This third one is a custom
NSView subview that does custom drawing,
and then another regular NSTextField.
Now, you could use any view you want,
but we highly encourage
you to use NSTableCellView.
It's optional, but it gives you some real
cool and easy things to do.
Specifically,
it gives you a couple of outlets.
It gives you a text field
and image view outlet.
So you as a developer could set this
text field outlet to your text field,
and the image view outlet
to your image view.
These are easy to access in code,
but they also do a couple
things for you automatically.
They're hints for accessibility, for one.
So when a user is using
VoiceOver and goes to your TableView,
the text field property will
automatically be read off to the user
without you having to do any work.
It kind of specifies the
main text for that row.
Now how many views do you have?
So you have a View-based TableView,
and if you have 20,000 rows or something,
does that mean you're going to have
20,000 row views and subviews within it?
Well, no you won't.
What you'll have is just
a view for each visible,
or a view in the visible rect,
and that is it.
There are no extra views
outside of that visible rect.
Now there are actually
some caveats to this.
For instance,
if the first responder is scrolled off,
the table actually will
keep track of that.
Or,
what if you had views animating around?
The table will actually
keep track of those views,
so that you can update them
dynamically if you need to.
And I'll show you how to
do that in a short bit.
So what happens when you scroll?
So you scroll up,
there are no views there,
and so the TableView is going to
just go ahead and pull those couple
of views that are no longer visible
and toss them into a reuse queue.
Now, you might have something else
already in this reuse queue,
and you can just go ahead and
pull those other views out of
the reuse queue and reuse them.
So it's good for performance to just
reuse the views again and again.
So that's basic TableView layout.
Let's move on and talk a little bit
about construction to figure out
how you make a View-based TableView.
So the basic data source
methods haven't changed.
You still have to implement
number of rows in TableView.
And the caveat to this
is if you use bindings.
So what you'll do is you'll
just return your model count
for the number of rows you want.
An optional method is TableView object
value for table column row.
Previously this was
required with the NSL based,
because it was set to the NSL value.
But now it's optional and I'll explain
how you can use it in a little bit.
So, now what can you do in your delegate
is the thing that actually tells the
table it's a View-based TableView.
You need to implement TableView,
ViewForTableColumnRow.
And here's one of the most
basic implementations.
You would alloc init your view,
in this case a simple text field.
Now, in this case I'm not showing
a frame that you alloc with,
and the frame really doesn't matter.
The table controls the frame.
You don't need to specify it.
It will use the frame for whatever
that cell is supposed to be.
So you knit your view,
set the string value or whatever
properties you want to it that are
specific to that particular row,
and then you can just go ahead
and return an auto-release view.
So it's really quite simple to do.
All this is optional if you use bindings,
and I'll talk about how to
do that in a little bit.
[Transcript missing]
So how do we do this?
Well,
NSView now has an identifier property
to uniquely identify that type of view.
Here's how we do it.
There's a new protocol,
NSUserInterfaceItemIdentification,
which gives an identifier property.
NSView implements this protocol,
and now you have an identifier
that can be set or read.
Here's a more typical implementation
of a View-based TableView.
If you've done any iOS
programming with UI TableView,
it's quite similar to that.
You're going to call a new table method,
makeViewWithIdentifier,
passing in the type of identifier
that you want to create,
and an owner of yourself.
Now, if it didn't have one
from the reuse queue,
which is what that method would do,
you're going to get back nil.
And so you'll have to allocate a new view
that you want to create for that cell,
set the identifier,
then go ahead and set up your string
value and other properties on it,
and return that result.
So this is a very typical
manual implementation.
But we thought about
some more and thought,
hey, we can make this even easier.
So this is an even more typical
delegate implementation.
Inside of it, you're just going to call
makeViewWithIdentifier,
and it's going to always
return a result for you.
And I'll show how in just a second.
Of course, you still have to set up
your initial properties here,
like the string value
for that particular row.
So before I talk about
how that method works,
let's talk a little bit about
NSNibLoading and how that works.
NSNib has a method,
InstantiateNibWithOwnerTopLevelObjects.
Now what's important about
here is the owner property.
So this is just a screenshot of
Interface Builder inside of Xcode.
And the owner property there
is that files owner that
you go ahead and specify.
The files owner is important because
that's what you can set your target
action to or your outlets from.
So keep that in mind.
Here's a screenshot of how we do design
time layout of the ViewBase TableView.
There are three columns.
Now what you can think of is each
of these design time cells are
effectively a little NSNib that the
TableView will encode within itself.
So we have this first one,
which has an identifier of main cell.
Next one is the date cell.
Third one would be that color cell.
And the final one would
be the group cell.
So each of those will just
be encoded into the NSNib
automatically within the table.
So the table has them
and knows about them,
can replicate everything about that view,
including the bindings.
So how does
MakeViewWithIdentifierOwner work?
So you need a view with an
identifier called MainCell.
So you as a developer are going to
call MakeViewWithIdentifierOwnerSelf.
is that cell with that identifier
already in the reuse queue?
Well, if it is,
it's going to go ahead and return
that old cell with that existing
identifier that it already found.
If it didn't,
and here's the new part that's
a little different from iOS,
we see if there's a design
time view with that identifier.
If there is,
the table automatically calls
instantiate_nib_with_owner,
finds that view with that identifier,
and goes ahead and returns you
that new instance of that view.
If there isn't,
you're kind of out of luck,
and at this point it does return nil.
But that's how that method works.
Updating ViewState for a Cell.
If you set some properties,
like the font to be bold
or something specific,
you as the developer will probably
have to initialize it in this method.
Otherwise,
if you got one out of the reuse queue,
it might have whatever properties
were previously set on it.
It's just an important thing
to note that you have to reset
all things like the font.
So let's take a look at another demo and
just see how basic TableView construction
is done at design time.
This is a really basic
view-based TableView.
I want to show how you
would add a new CellView.
Inside the object library,
you could just search
for NSTableCellView.
You could drag an image and text cell
that's already predefined and set up.
The new important part is the
user interface IAM identifier.
You could call it MyCell
or whatever you want.
So I'm going to undo that and just look
at one that I already dropped down here.
If I select the CellView,
I can see that this one has
an identifier of main cell.
All right,
so that's how it's actually set up.
Some other interesting things about it.
You'll recall previously I said that it
had two outlets from NSTableCellView.
It has an ImageView and
a TextFieldOutlet.
So I'll show you how those
come into play in a second.
In addition,
you can drop down other views,
like a button inside of it,
and you could actually have the buttons
will be covering the latest
and most recent applications
using the new function,
which is called the
"Bottom Clicked Action".
So in a basic implementation,
you would go ahead and
create your model object.
Here it's just an array of images.
Number of rows in TableView, of course,
is just going to return the array count.
Then the interesting new part,
View for Table Column is implemented.
And as I showed you before,
at design time there is a cell
with an identifier called MainCell.
So MakeViewWithIdentifier will always
get a result back created from you,
either from the reuse queue or a
new one that it just instantiated.
It's going to go ahead and grab the model
object and then set up properties on it,
accessing those outlets.
So it accesses the text field,
set string value, and accesses the image
and sets image value,
and then returns the result.
So that's the most basic implementation
of a View-based TableView.
It's really easy to do.
Now how do you respond to an action?
So if you click on that button, well,
this is my delegate and
there are a bunch of rows.
How do I know which row that
action should be applied on?
Well, the TableView has a
method called RowForView.
So you can just find out what
row that view is actually on.
In this case, we're going to find out
which one the sender was on.
And the sender was the button.
So we know which row was actually
clicked on and we can do some
action based on that row.
So that's also pretty easy to do.
So how do you do editing?
That's the next question
that people will usually ask.
Well, with NSCell,
you would use TableView set
object value for table column row.
Now, if you have a View-based TableView,
what if you have more than
one text field in that cell?
It's kind of ambiguous
how you would actually,
or what the table should
do with this method,
because we don't know
which one you want to edit.
And actually,
we don't have to do anything special.
It's just a text field.
You can just use normal
target action-based editing or
notifications on that text field
to find out when text changes.
And so that's what you're going to do,
and it's really easy to do.
How do you manually begin editing?
Well, with NSCells, you would use
EditColumnRowWithEventSelect,
and that would go ahead
and edit that cell.
But again, it's ambiguous if you have
more than one text field.
And in fact,
editing is really just making
it the first responder.
So in a View-based TableView,
you'll just call MakeFirstResponder,
and then it begins editing.
So that's really easy, too.
But how do we control editing
to make it behave like a table?
Normally in Finder,
if you click on a row,
it doesn't start editing right away.
In fact,
you can only edit a row in Finder if you
click on text in an already selected row.
And it actually happens
in a slight delay,
so you can actually do a double click and
have a double click action take effect,
or a single click
action to begin editing.
So how does the table make that work?
The table overrides hitTest and
doesn't let the hitTest go to the view,
if certain conditions are met.
And the way it does it is it calls
a new responder method on itself,
validateProposedFirstResponder for event.
So it takes that view that you clicked on
and calls it with that as the responder,
passes the event that was coming in,
and the table then
implements this and says,
"Okay, is this something with text
that needs to be editing?" Yes,
it is.
Well, I'm going to save off what would be
the first responder and just wait
until the double click interval passes.
After the double click interval passes,
the table just calls makeFirstResponder
on it and it starts to edit.
This way, a double click action could
fire and it will stop that.
Now why is this important?
We use a developer could subclass and
override this and add your own behavior.
Or you could have a control which is in
a table that might want to do something
only if the table says it can do it.
So you inside your control could call
validate proposed first responder up
the responder chain and the table,
if it's there,
could do certain things that
prevent editing or prevent like
the IBM cursor from showing up.
Alright, so that's basic construction
of a View-based TableView.
Let's move on and talk a little bit
about bindings and how they work.
So how do you bind content
for a particular cell?
You can still use an NSArrayController,
except you will use the
NSArrayController only to bind
the content of the TableView.
You will not use an NSTableColumn
and set up properties on that,
because that only applies to
the NSCell in the TableColumn.
Now here is where you could
implement that TableView object
value for TableColumnRow method
and actually return something.
So if you don't want to use an
array controller for your object,
but you still want to use bindings,
you implement this delegate
method and you can return
your model object from here.
So let's see if you do that,
how it would actually work.
Simple Object Value Type of
View This is our view which we
gave an identifier of DateCell.
It's just a basic NSTextField.
NSTextField implements SetObjectValue.
The table says, "Hey, view there,
do you respond to
SetObjectValue?" You do?
OK.
I'll take whatever object value I have,
either from the delegate
method or the array controller,
and call SetObjectValue on you.
Now, this is pretty much what regular
NSCell-based TableViews were
doing for the longest time.
Nothing really special about here.
So let's take a look at a
complex object value example.
So this cell here,
which we would call the main cell,
it has more than one property
that we want to bind to.
Before it was difficult to do more
than one binding inside of a cell.
So how are we going to solve that?
The answer is to use
NSTableCellView as your whole cell.
NSTableCellView also has
an object value property.
And so again the table is going
to see that it has it there,
call it, and set the object value.
So that means the whole cell has
this object value inside of it.
What you can do with that is you can
do a binding from that particular view,
like the image,
to the cell view's object value,
and then any model object
properties you have,
like the image.
Or your text field.
You could do cellview
object value dot title.
So that's how you can really
easily do bindings inside of it.
So let's take a look at how you
set them up inside of Xcode 4.
So this has got the text field selected
inside of the design time environment.
And the things to point out here
is that there's a new binding
target that you can select.
You can select the cell that
that actual view lives in.
Zen.
If you're binding to that,
there's always going to be
an object value property.
So you can bind to the object
value of that title in this case.
So that's pretty easy to set up and do.
[Transcript missing]
"And we can just automatically use
that same identifier to find a view
that you designed at design time.
So again in the
TableView Playground demo here,
if I go ahead and
select the table column,
the thing that's interesting to point
out is that the identifier is set
to sample window cell in this case.
Now if I select that cell, and again,
you could have multiple columns,
or you could have multiple cells.
In this case it's just a
one column and one cell.
But the interesting thing here is
that that cell's identifier exactly
matches the table column's identifier.
And if it matches,
the TableView will go ahead and
automatically use that cell from the Nib,
and you don't have to implement
that delegate method at all.
Now, you're probably thinking, "Oh, well,
it might suck to keep
those two things in sync,
because now I have to rename it in
one spot and rename it in another
spot and do a bunch of work.
And if one's not set,
you might get no views showing." Well,
we have a solution Xcode for,
and it's called Automatic Identifiers.
So what you can do is when you
select the table column or the cell,
you just set the user interface
identifier to Automatic,
which is the default value.
And what's going to happen here
is we will automatically create
an identifier for you and keep
the two for the table column and
the cell in sync automatically.
So it makes it easy to do.
So let's move on and talk about
customizing a View-based TableView.
I'm going to show another demo
application called the Hover Table Demo.
Again, you can download this on
the developer site and play
around with the source code.
Some interesting things here is
when I hover over a particular row,
it does a cool hover animation.
I'm going to show how to do that.
When I select a row,
a couple things happen.
It draws custom selection and
the text field's text turns bold.
I'm going to show how to do that.
Another thing it's doing,
which is a little more subtle,
is the horizontal separators
are actually a subtle little
gradient to give it this cool look.
I'm going to show how to do that too.
How do you do custom row selection now?
You can subclass NSTableRowView to do it.
NSTableRowView has a bunch of
hooks to customize drawing.
You can override DrawSelection and Rect,
and I'm not going to go over the code,
but all it's going to do in this
particular case is create a Bezier
path and fill it with a light grey
color and a darker grey stroke.
It's really easy to customize selection.
Now, what was hard before to
customize selection with is,
how do you know if that table should
draw in the active or inactive state?
So when the table is first responder,
it would usually have a blue highlight,
and when it's not,
like in a background window
or not the first responder,
it would draw a selection with a gray.
And the way that you can do
that is you can look at the
rowView property emphasized.
If emphasized is set to yes,
it should draw in the active state,
and if it's no, the inactive.
Now how do you do that
bold selected text?
And so when the selection changes,
you get the typical delegate method,
TableViewSelectionDidChange.
Now what's new here is you as a
developer want to enumerate all
the views the table knows about.
You could try and get all the views
in the visible rect and work on those,
but I said before,
well there might be some extra views
floating around with animations,
or a view might be the first
responder and scrolled away from
the visible rect but still around.
So you want to enumerate
everything the table knows about.
So you're going to call
enumerateAvailableRowViews using block,
and you're going to pass a block
which takes the row view and the row
that the table has and knows about.
So you have the row view,
and the row view stores these views.
So you can use a View at
Column to find that particular
view for the first column.
Before we saw the view
had a text field outlet,
so we can go ahead and
grab the text field outlet.
We can access some
properties on the row view,
like if it's selected or not.
And then based on that, well,
if it's selected, let's use a bold font.
If it's not selected,
let's use just a regular system font.
So it's pretty darn easy to
enumerate all the row views and
all the views and update one
particular property that you want.
It's also quite efficient and fast to do.
So how do you do this hover effect
when you mouse over and it does
this kind of cool little gradient?
Let me show how to do that.
What you're going to do is just
use the typical NSView method,
update tracking areas,
to go ahead and update
some tracking areas.
In this case,
it's going to allocate a tracking area
and store it in an INVAR of the row view.
If that's not in our
tracking areas array,
it'll call add tracking area on itself,
and it has the tracking area set up.
The tracking area will then give the row
view a mouse entered and mouse exited
event when the mouse comes in and goes.
And so all we're going to do is
set a bit under our mouse inside
to know when the mouse is inside
of us and let us redisplay.
And of course, mouse exited,
it'll undo that.
So then in our drawing method,
again there are lots
of great drawing hooks.
You can subclass and override,
draw background and erect.
You can fill with that background
color that I talked about way long ago.
You can check your bit to see
if the mouse is inside of you.
And if it is, you can allocate a gradient
and just fill with a gradient.
And that's how you can do that
hover effect really easily.
How do you do the custom separators?
It's kind of hard to see
that separator again,
but it's a nice little cool gradient.
And what you can do is you can
override draw separator in Rect.
For the row view,
you are responsible for drawing
the bottom of the separator,
or the bottom separator.
The previous rows will draw
the top separator above you.
So you're going to grab your bounds.
You want to draw at the bottom,
so you're going to get the
maxY of your separator,
or maxY of your bounds.
Set the height to 1.
And then the interesting thing is you're
going to probably use a common method
called DrawSeparatorInRect to do the
fill of the separator however you want.
Now I'm going to show
why in just a second.
So the row view draws its own separator
so that it can move around with the row
view itself when an animation happens.
But how do you deal with these
empty separators that are at the
bottom of the table view when
you have more content to show?
Well, the TableView already has a method
to customize the grid drawing,
called DrawGridAndClipRect.
So here you can override that and
do some custom separator drawing.
The code is a little bit more complex,
but what you want to do is you don't
need to draw those separators for
the spots where all the rows are at.
So you grab the maxY of the last row.
You're going to go past it because that
last row drew it separate at the bottom.
And now the code is going to
scroll up to the next page.
You're going to do what you did before,
basically,
which is you're going to figure
out the bounds for the separator
that you want to draw in.
You're going to enumerate until you're
actually at the bottom of your view.
And you're just going to
call that same method before,
drawSeparatorInRect,
to go ahead and draw a separator.
So it's pretty easy to do that too.
So you have this custom row view.
How are you going to actually
tell the table about the row view?
Well, there's a new delegate method,
TableViewRowViewForRow,
which allows you to go ahead
and allocate a row view,
your custom one,
set any custom properties you want,
and return the result.
Now, another thing to note here, again,
the frame isn't really important.
You could use the row height if you want,
but the table will control the frame,
and so you can kind of specify
whatever you want there.
[Transcript missing]
But even that's optional,
so you don't even have to do that,
and you can do it all at design time.
So here's how you can specify a
rowview at design time without
having to write any code at all.
I have the row view selected here,
and the thing that is unique
and must be pointed out is that
there's a special user interface
item identifier that is set.
NSTableViewRowViewKey.
If you use this special identifier,
which is in the header,
then the table automatically
search for and find that row
view and use it for all the rows.
And then you don't have
to write a delegate method
or any code to specify it.
So let's do another demo of drag
and drop in TableView Playground.
So if I go ahead and show the
complex outline view example,
I want to show some drag and drop
features and talk about them again.
So one thing that's important
to note when I start dragging,
there is two separate
rows that were dragged,
and I want to show how to
create two separate rows.
When I let go, it's subtle,
but what happens is the
table opened up a gap,
and then the drag image actually animated
from where you had the drag image all
the way to that gap's ending location.
So I want to show how to do that.
Multi-image dragging.
Previously, you would have one huge
drag image for the table.
Now,
you can have multiple NSDraggingItems.
If we take a look at NSDraggingItem,
hopefully you went to
Raleigh's talk yesterday.
If you didn't, I'm going to do a quick
review on NSDraggingItem.
The dragging item has an item,
which is the pasteboard reader or writer
that specifies the pasteboard data.
It has a whole frame for
that particular item,
because inside of it you're
going to have an image component.
Or really, you might have more than
one image component.
In this case, there's two.
So that's what an
NSDraggingItem is composed of.
The API for it, to create one when you
put it on the pasteboard,
is using initWithPasteboardWriter.
So you provide your pasteboard
data for the dragging item,
and then you're going to provide
an ImageComponentsProvider.
This provides all those image components.
Now, it's an array of
NSDraggingImageComponents,
and it's a block because you don't want
to provide all the components all at
once because they all may not be visible.
You don't want to drag 20,000
rows and create 20,000 images.
The dragging system will call you back
and create them only when they're needed.
So how do you put an
item on the pasteboard?
There's a new TableView method,
PasteboardWriterForRow.
And what you're going to do
here is for that particular row,
you're just going to return something
that implements NSPasteboardWriting.
So typically,
you might just make your model
object implement NSPasteboardWriting.
In this case, in the demo,
it's an ATDesktop entity
that implements it.
What's going to happen is
the table will automatically
take that pasteboard writer,
create an NSDragging item for you,
and use that to start the drag with.
If you don't want that row to be dragged,
you can just return nil and
that particular row will be
excluded from that dragging.
So how do you implement
NSPaceboard Writer?
Well, it's pretty easy.
You will just implement the protocol,
and I'll show you in a
second what you'll do.
But for this particular example,
we have a file URL that is the main
thing that we're dragging around.
Our implementation will implement
the two required methods:
writable types for pasteboard and
pasteboard property list for type.
We have that file URL,
and its URL implements
NSPasteboardWriter,
so we're just going to delegate those
methods directly to our file URL.
That's how we can easily
add drag and drop support,
or drag source support, from the table.
Now how do you provide those drag images?
Because that NSDraggingItem has
those image components provider to
provide a couple image components.
So like the image and text
is being dragged around.
Each of those is an
NSDraggingImage component.
They have a key to
identify what type it is,
in this case it would be an icon,
and a contents, which is the actual image
that's being dragged around.
Drag around two images.
One with a key of
NSDraggingImageComponentIconKey.
This is the main icon the
dragging system will know about.
The other one is a label key
to specify the label portion.
That way the dragging system can
animate the label portion from one
view to the label portion of another
view and move it around as necessary.
Now, these can be automatically
provided by you,
or for you, by NSTableCellView.
There's a dragging image components
method on NSTableCellView,
and what that does is it goes ahead and
uses your two properties that you set up.
Again, the outlets from the text
field and image view.
If you as a developer set those up,
then the dragging image components
will automatically provide those for
you without having to do any work.
Then the question is, well,
what if you have another one that
you want to provide an image for,
like the color or something?
Let's show how you would do that.
You can subclass NSTableCellView,
override dragging image components,
call super,
which is going to give you those
components for the image and text.
They're going to have to create
an NSDraggingImage component
with your key that you want.
In this case, we could call it color.
You're going to set the contents
to be an image that represents
your view being dragged.
It's pretty easy to do,
and inside of the sample application,
I show how to do it.
You're going to set the frame with
respect to the cell view's bounds,
so it does a convert rect of the
color view's bounds from the color
view into our own coordinate system.
Then you just add it to
the result and return it.
That's how you get that extra drag
image to be dragged from your cell view.
How do you change a drag image?
In Finder, if you have a big icon view
with a big image and text,
when you drag it over the TableView,
you want to go ahead and morph into
something that the table knows about.
You want the image to shrink and
the text to move over to the right.
How do you do that?
You want to be a dragging destination.
What you can implement is
a new Lion method called
OutlineView UpdateDraggingItemsForDrag.
Inside of this,
you're going to want to take that
pasteboard data that's being dragged
over you and create a view and
create dragging image components
for it to automatically animate from
what was dragged over you to what,
or from the source to what's going to be
you and your particular representation.
You create an NSTable CellView with
MakeViewWithIdentifier.
You're going to use that
to stamp out the images.
You also set up a cell frame
for your particular row,
just setting up your width and height.
[Transcript missing]
And then you're going to call a
new method on NSDraggingInfo called
EnumerateDraggingItemsWithOptions
for View,
Classes, Search Options, Using Block.
I'm going to highlight some of
the important parts about it,
but you get this block callback
for every instance of the model
object that could be created.
We're going to look at the dragging
item and kind of ignore the index
and stop parameters because we aren't
going to do anything special with him.
[Transcript missing]
What you do inside of here is
you have your sample cell view,
you set the dragging item
to it as your object value.
Now this dragging item,
that was automatically created
from the classes there.
So the classes, which you have specified
as your model objects,
are how that gets into the item.
So the dragging info created an
AT Desktop entity for us with the
Pasteboard reader automatically.
Set the object value, bindings,
and what not to display things.
Set up the frame.
And again, the CellView has the
dragging image components.
We'll use that to return the
And it gets whatever
stuff we added to it,
or whatever stuff the table
implements automatically for us.
So how do we accept a drop and do
that animation I was talking about?
So we want the table to open up the gap,
and wherever the drag image is located,
drag from that location
right to our final location.
So let's see how to go ahead and do that.
So first, you have to tell the
dragging system that,
well, you accept the drop,
and you want to do an animation.
OutlineView validateDrop proposed
child index is a very old
delegate method to accept a drop.
So you'll do your typical
pasteboard validation,
and you can look at the demo
application to see how we do it.
We're going to set a new parameter
on Lion called AnimatesToDestination
on the dragging info.
That's telling the drag subsystem that,
hey,
you do want to animate and you're going
to do an animation from that source
location of the drag image to your
final location of where your row is.
So that's important to set.
Now, how do you actually accept the drop?
You implement the old delegate method,
OutlineView acceptDrop, item,
child index,
and TableView has a similar one.
What you do inside of here is
what you would do when you were
updating the dragging images,
except you want to actually accept the
drop and put things into your model.
So you're going to create another
array with your model objects of like
ATDesktop entity in this example.
And you're going to call enumerate
dragging items with options for view
classes search options using block again.
Let's take a look at your implementation
of what this block would look like.
So again, that dragging item to item was
automatically created from the
array that we passed to this method.
So it used NSPaceboardReader to
automatically create your model object.
So we grab our model object
and store it in a little local.
We take that model object
and insert it into our array
that we have for our model.
In this OutlineView example,
it's just putting it directly
into the children array.
So that updated our model,
now we have to update the view.
So the OutlineView has a new method,
insertItemsAtIndexes in
parent with an animation.
I'm gonna talk a little bit more
about animations in a second.
And now what this does is
you pass an animation of an
NSTableViewAnimationEffectGap,
and that's gonna tell the table, hey,
open up a gap, 'cause we're gonna do
an animation into it.
As soon as you call that method,
At this point, the table can be thought
of in its final state.
So you did an insert into the table,
the table knows that you did that.
You can call methods on it,
like find out the row for that
particular item you just inserted.
You now have the row and you can
find the actual frame of that item
using the typical table methods
like frame of cell at column row.
And what you can do here is you'll
just update the dragging frame.
So what this does is it's
telling that dragging item,
hey, drag from wherever you are to this
final row location and animate it.
So that was how you would do
drag and drop and accept it.
Let's move on and talk a
little bit about animating.
So there are three basic
methods to do an animation,
and they are very similar
to NSMutableArray.
What we have is insert rows
at indexes with animation,
remove rows at indexes with animation,
and move row at index to index.
These are the TableView methods.
There are also equivalent
OutlineView ones,
like I was previously showing a use of,
that insert into a particular
outline item and the children
of that outline item.
They work in a very similar way,
but I'm not going to cover them.
How does this work?
Insert rows at indexes
takes an index set.
This is kind of pseudo code,
but let's say I pass an index
set with indexes of 1 and 3
and see how it would work.
What would happen is a hole
would open up for row 1 and
that item would be inserted.
A hole would open up for row 3,
and then that item would be inserted.
So two new items that we pass in
would automatically be inserted.
The cool thing to note here is
that by using these methods,
the selection is automatically updated.
So you don't have to worry about the
selection being stuck at the wrong row.
This is much easier than using
something like ReloadData.
Now what if you want to batch updates?
So what if you have a bunch of
changes that you are going to do?
You're going to insert a ton of rows,
remove a ton of rows.
Well,
it's better for performance to batch
them together inside of a begin updates
and end updates TableView block.
The reason that you want to do this is,
let's say you go ahead
and insert 100 rows,
and you call insert rows of
indexes with 100 of them,
and then you delete those 100 rows,
or you insert another 10 or 20.
Any time you call that method,
the table will go ahead and
create views and do an animation.
Well, you don't want it to animate
those hundred rows which might
not be on screen at the end of
your particular set of operations,
because you might be inserting
and removing them right away.
So if you batch them all together,
the table is smart enough to
optimize it and do only what
the user would end up seeing.
So for performance,
you want to call begin
updates and end updates.
Now how does this work?
Now it's important to realize this is
actually a little bit different than the
similar methods on iOS and UITableView.
In that case, with UITableView,
it would sort of freeze the
table's contents and you
could kind of modify each row.
The one for NSTableView works much
more similar to NSMutableArray.
So here's an example
of what I mean by that.
You call begin updates,
do insert row at index
with an index of 2,
opens up a slot,
you get that new first row.
You call it again, opens up a slot,
you get that new row.
Now this isn't really too complex,
it's really just the way an array works.
You're inserting it again and again.
But this is different than iOS,
and if you tried to insert
the row twice in iOS,
it might throw an exception.
So I just want to point
out that difference there.
Now how do you do row height animations?
So one of the other
things I showed before,
and this is a little video,
is how do you animate the
row heights for the table?
In addition,
the table is animating the row heights,
but you own that cell view,
and inside that cell view some
other things are happening.
A couple views are fading away,
and the actual contents of
the image are shrinking.
So how do you go ahead and do that?
What you're going to do is use note
height of rows with indexes changed.
So this assumes you're using
variable row heights and using the
variable row height delegate methods.
You create your index set,
call this method,
and now this method will
just always animate.
So it always goes ahead
and animates for you.
For every ViewBase TableView.
So how do you take your views and
sync them with that animation?
Well, the way you're going to do it
is use an animation context
and do a begin grouping and end
grouping to group it all together.
So inside of that,
you could do things like change
the duration of the animation.
You can update your views,
say do an animation to hide a view
or change the size of the image view.
Then you can go ahead and tell the table
to do its animation by calling note
height of rows with indexes changed.
It will animate.
And then you end your grouping.
They will all animate then together.
Then that begs the question, well,
what if I don't want
that method to animate?
The way you can make any of
those methods to animate,
such as the insert, remove,
and move methods,
is you can create an animation
grouping and set the duration to zero.
So if you set the duration to zero,
it will tell the table, hey,
I really don't want
to animate this thing,
so don't do that.
Now, it would be really cool if all
these methods work within a cell.
And in fact, all these methods will work
within an NSCell-based TableView.
The insert, the remove, the move,
the height of rows with
indexes changed will all work.
But you have to do one thing.
To make them work with
the NSL-based TableView,
you have to call begin
updates and end updates.
When you call begin updates,
what the TableView will do,
it's going to draw all of your NSCells
into a temporary image and swap them
out with a View-based TableView with
exactly what you were seeing there.
You can then have an initial
state to do an animation from.
So you can call insertRowsAtImages,
removeRowsAtIndexes or whatnot,
and the animations will happen and work.
This is actually how all the
animations work inside a Lion for
outline views which were not
moved to a View-based TableView.
And if you want to see an example,
the drag-and-drop OutlineView demo
application was updated.
You can go find it on the developer
site and see how it's done.
So in summary, I talked about layout,
how tables are actually constructed,
how a row view comes into play,
and how it all fits together.
Construction, Data Source Methods,
and Design Time Layout.
Bindings, Bind Content,
and Customizing TableViews.
Download the Hover Table demo,
check it out,
play around with the source.
Talked about drag and drop,
creating dragging image components,
and dragging multiple rows instead
of a big single drag image.
And then finally I talked about animating
and how to do some cool animations.
For more information,
contact Bill Dedeny,
our Frameworks Evangelist.
Our documentation has been updated
for the View-based TableView.
We have the developer forums.
I frequently browse around there
and answer table questions.
We have related sessions.
James Dempsey is giving our
Design Patterns to Simplify
Mac Accessibility at 3:15 today.
It's also the Song Talk.
So I highly encourage you to go to that.
He's going to talk about how to add
accessibility to View-based TableViews,
which is really easy to do now.
Before it was difficult to
add accessibility to NSCells.
Now it's pretty easy
to make it with a view.